---
title: Type-Driven Development of Communicating Systems using Idris
tags: idris,effects,sessions,tdvcs
...

This week, I gave a talk about my work with Edwin Brady at University
of St Andrews, whilst visiting Imperial College London for the Border
Patrol Project.  The talk was an extended version of my FP-Dag Talk,
which was a revamp of my SPLS talk.

> There is a disconnect between the tooling used to design, implement and
> reason about communication protocols and their implementations. Session
> Types are a typing discipline that help resolve this difference by
> allowing protocol specifications to be used during type-checking to
> ensure that implementations adhere to a given specification.
>
> This talk introduces `Sessions`, an adaptation of Session Types in
> Idris, and demonstrates `Sessions` ability to design and realise
> several common protocols. Limitations will be discussed as well. Idris
> is a general purpose programming language that supports full-spectrum
> dependent types, providing programmers with the ability to reason more
> precisely about programs.
>
> `Sessions` improves upon existing Session Type implementations by
> introducing value dependencies between messages and fine-grained
> channel management during protocol design and implementation. We also
> use Idris' support for EDSL construction to allow protocol design and
> analysis to occur in the same language as their implementation. Thereby
> allowing for an intrinsic bond to be introduced between a protocol's
> implementation and specification, and also with its verification.
>
> Using `Sessions`, we can reduce the existing disconnect between the
> tooling used for protocol design, implementation, and verification.

Slides are not available online.
