---
title:  A Type-System for describing the Structural Topology of System-on-a-Chip Architectures.
tags: idris,soc,hardware,linear-types,dependent-types,border-patrol,tdd,msp101
...

In February, I gave a talk about my work on the [Border
Patrol](https://border-patrol.github.io) at the University of
Strathclyde's, School of Computing and Information Sciences [MSP
101](http://msp.cis.strath.ac.uk/).

This was a fun talk to prepare and deliver as the MSP101 talks are
traditionally *Chalk&Talk*. Hopefully, I was able to convince the
group that I was working on something interesting.

> The protocols that describe the interactions between IP Cores on
> System-on-a-Chip architectures are well-documented. These protocols
> described not only the structural properties of the physical
> interfaces but also the behaviour of the emanating signals. However,
> there is a disconnect between the design of SoC architectures, their
> formal description, and the verification of their implementation in
> known hardware description
> languages.
>
> Within the Border Patrol project we are investigating how to capture
> and reason about the structural and behavioural properties of SoC
> architectures using state-of-the-art advances in programming language
> research. Namely, we are investigating using dependent types and
> session types for the description of hardware communication.
>
> In this talk I will discuss my work in designing a linked family of
> languages that captures and reasons about the topological structure of
> a System-on-a-Chip. These languages provide correct-by-construction
> guarantees over the interaction protocols themselves; the adherence of
> a component that connects using said protocols; and the validity of
> the specified connections. These guarantees are provided through abuse
> of indexed monads to reason about resource usage; and general
> (ab)use of dependent types as presented in Idris.
>
> I will not cover all aspects of the languages but will concentrate my
> talk detailing the underlying theories that facilitate the
> correct-by-construction guarantees.

Slides are not available.
