---
title:  A Type-System for describing System-on-a-Chip Architectures.
tags: idris,soc,hardware,linear-types,dependent-types,border-patrol,tdd,stacs-fp
...

I am giving a [talk](https://blogs.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk/csblog/2018/03/30/a-type-system-for-describing-system-on-a-chip-architectures-jan-de-muijnck-hughes/) about my work on the [Border
Patrol](https://border-patrol.github.io) at the University of
St Andrews, [School of Computer Science](https://www.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk), [Functional Programming Group](https://www-fp.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk/).

This extends upon my talk from February to the MSP Group at
Strathclyde with a more complete picture of the language and how it is
used. Sadly, this talk won't be *Chalk&Talk*, and a more conventional slidedeck will be used.
If tempted, I may do live programming.

> The protocols that describe the interactions between IP Cores on
> System-on-a-Chip (SoC) architectures are well-documented. These
> protocols described not only the structural properties of the physical
> interfaces but also the behaviour of the emanating signals. However,
> there is a disconnect between the design of SoC architectures, their
> formal description, and the verification of their implementation in
> known hardware description languages.
>
> Within the Border Patrol project we are investigating how to capture
> and reason about the structural and behavioural properties of SoC
> architectures using state-of-the-art advances in programming language
> research. Namely, we are investigating using dependent types and
> session types to capture and reason about hardware communication.
>
> In this talk I will discuss my work in designing a dependent type-
> system and corresponding language that captures and reasons about the
> topological structure of a System-on-a-Chip. This language provides
> correct-by-construction guarantees over:
>
> 1. the physical structure of an interaction protocol;
> 1. the adherence of a component’s interface to a given protocol; and
> 1. the validity of the specified connections made between components.
>
> We provide these guarantees through the (ab)use of dependent types as
> presented in Idris; and abuse of indexed monads to reason about
> resource usage.
>
> Given time I will give an account of how this language enables
> reasoning about SoC behaviour when considered in conjunction with
> Session Types.

Slides are not available.
