---
title: "FP Dag 17-Type-Driven Design of Communicating Systems using Idris"
tags: ["idris","effects","sessions","tdvcs"]
date: 2017-01-09
---

Last week, I gave a talk about my work
at [FP Dag '17]( http://wiki.clean.cs.ru.nl/NL-FP_dag_2017)
https://msp-strath.github.io/spls-16/) at the annual meeting of
functional programmers in the Netherlands. This year the meeting was
in Nijmegen at the RU, where I did my Masters. Although I am not
resident anymore in the Netherlands, I used the oppurtunity to talk
about my work to an international audience, and to see old friends.
The talk is a slight revamp of my SPLS talk.

> The idea of communicating systems is a cornerstone of modern
> technology that allows heterogeneous collections of components to
> communicate through well-defined communication patterns. However,
> there is a disconnect between the tooling and languages used to
> design, implement and reason about communication protocols.
>
> Idris is a general purpose programming language that supports
> full-dependent types, providing programmers with the ability to
> reason more precisely about programs. Inspired by work on Session
> types, our research looks to leverage dependent types to describe
> and reason about secure communication patterns and their
> implementation in different communication contexts.
>
> This talk presents our current progress and introduces sessions, a
> library for describing, and reasoning about, the interactions of a
> communicating system. Demonstrated is use of sessions to describe
> common communication patterns, and how the library enforces
> correctness of the pattern itself through type-level guarantees.
>
> Given time future work will also be presented detailing our next
> steps in linking these descriptions to implementations such that
> compile time correctness guarantees over the actions of an entity in
> a communicating system can be given respective to known
> specification.

[Slides are available online.](https://jfdm.host.cs.st-andrews.ac.uk/presentation/2017-01-06-FP-Dag.pdf)
