---
title: "LightClick---A Linear Typed Orchestration Language for System-On-A-Chip Designs"
tags: ["idris","soc","hardware","substructural-type-systems","dependent-types","border-patrol","tdd","systems"]
date: 2019-11-05
---

On Tuesday 05 November 2019, I gave a talk at my alma matter on some recent results.

The abstract is:

> Two important aspects in hardware design are the safe routing of
> signals between modules, and ensuring that ports are correctly
> connected. Well-known hardware description languages such as
> SystemVerilog, provide nominal checking over these aspects. Thus,
> leaving correctness checks over module orchestration to be performed
> post-design-time using static analyses, testing, and during
> synthesis.
>
> Using a mixture of dependent and quantitative typing, we can lift
> external correctness checks over module connections directly into
> the type-system. With this approach we can detect more errors at
> design time, enhance the safety of our hardware designs, and thus
> increase design productivity.
>
> In this talk I will introduce and discuss LightClick, an
> orchestration language for hardware design that exemplifies our
> approach. LightClick uses quantitative typing to ensure linear usage
> of ports, and dependent types to ensure that port compatibility is a
> decidable compile-time check. I will show how LightClick can be used
> to model simple hardware designs, how SystemVerilog stubs are
> generated from designs using staged interpretation.

Slides are not available.
