---
title: "Value-Dependent Session Design in a Dependently-Typed Language."
tags: ["idris","dependent-types","session-types","paper","places","tdvcs","border-patrol"]
date: 2019-03-07
---

I am *very* pleased to announce that my paper on designing a global session description language within [Idris](https://www.idris-lang.org) was accepted to [PLACES 2019](https://conf.researchr.org/home/etaps-2019/places-2019).
This was based on ideas that myself and Edwin Brady had as part of the TDVCS project, that were then matured in the Border Patrol project with Wim Vanderbauwhede.

> Session Types offer a typing discipline that allows protocol
> specifications to be used during type-checking, ensuring that
> implementations adhere to a given specification. When looking to
> realise global session types in a dependently typed language care
> must be taken that values introduced in the description are used by
> roles that know about the value.
>
> We present Sessions, a Resource Dependent Embedded Domain Specific
> Language (EDSL) for describing global session descriptions in the
> dependently typed language Idris. As we construct session
> descriptions the values parameterising the EDSLs’ type keeps track
> of roles and messages they have encountered. We can use this
> knowledge to ensure that message values are only used by those who
> know the value. Sessions supports protocol descriptions that are
> computable, composable, higher-order, and value-dependent. We
> demonstrate Sessions expressiveness by describing the TCP Handshake,
> a multi-modal server providing echo and basic arithmetic operations,
> and a Higher-Order protocol that supports an authentication
> interaction step.

More details will follow the workshop itself, and once DOIs have been minted..
