---
title: "A Framework for Resource Dependent EDSLs in a Dependently Typed Language"
tags: ["idris","dependent-types","border-patrol","tdvcs","ecoop"]
date: 2020-11-16
---


My [ECOOP2020](https://2020.ecoop.org/) video & paper detailing how one can create Resource-Dependent EDSLs in Idris are out!

[They can be found online on the conference website](https://2020.ecoop.org/details/ecoop-2020-papers/20/A-Framework-for-Resource-Dependent-EDSLs-in-a-Dependently-Typed-Language).
Apologies in advance for the quiet audio!

> Idris' `Effects` library demonstrates how to embed resource
> dependent algebraic effect handlers into a dependently typed host
> language, providing run-time and compile-time based reasoning on
> type-level resources.  Building upon this work, `RESOURCES` is a
> framework for realising *Embedded Domain Specific Languages* (EDSLs)
> with type systems that contain domain specific substructural
> properties.  Differing from `Effects`, `RESOURCES` allows a
> language's substructural properties to be encoded within type-level
> resources that are associated with language variables.  Such an
> association allows for multiple effect instances to be reasoned
> about autonomically and without explicit type-level declaration.
> Type-level predicates are used as proof that the language's
> substructural properties hold.  Several exemplar EDSLs are presented
> that illustrates our framework's operation and how dependent types
> provide correctness-by-construction guarantees that substructural
> properties of written programs hold.

This is joint work with [Wim Vanderbauwhede](https://twitter.com/wim_v12e) & [Edwin Brady](https://twitter.com/edwinbrady).
