---
title: "Building Resource-Dependent EDSLs in a Dependently-Typed Language"
tags: ["idris","dependent-types","border-patrol","tdvcs","msp101","talk"]
date: 2020-06-19
---

Today, I gave an extended talk about Resource Dependent EDSLs in a Dependently Typed
Language at the MSP101 Seminar Series of the MSP Group at the University of Strathclyde.
This was joint work with Wim Vanderbauwhede, and Edwin Brady.

> While many people use dependent types for theorem proving some of us like to use dependent types for building, and running, safer programs.
>
> Idris' Effects library demonstrates how to embed resource dependent algebraic effect handlers into a dependently typed host language, providing run-time and compile-time based reasoning on type-level resources. Building upon this work, Resources is a framework for realising EDSLs with type systems that contain domain specific substructural properties. Differing from Effects, Resources allows a language's substructural properties to be encoded within type-level resources that are associated with language variables. Such an association allows for multiple effect instances to be reasoned about autonomically and without explicit type-level declaration. We use type-level predicates as proof that a language's substructural properties hold.

> Using Resources we have shown how to provide correctness-by-construction guarantees that substructural properties of written programs hold when working with =Files=, specifying Domain Specific =BiGraphs=, and Global Session Descriptions---=Sessions=. With this talk I want to discuss the how and why of Resources, and show how we can use the framework to build EDSLs with interesting type-systems.

> This talk is part practise talk for ECOOP 2020, part tutorial on an important idiom for practical dependently-typed programming, and part chance to highlight more how dependent-types are useful when programming in the real world.
