---
title: "A Framework for Resource Dependent EDSLs in a Dependently Typed Language"
tags: ["idris","dependent-types","border-patrol","tdvcs","ecoop"]
date: 2020-05-28
---

I am *very* pleased to announce that my paper describing a framework
for constructing Resource Dependent EDSLs in a Dependently Typed
Language was accepted to [ECOOP
2020](https://conf.researchr.org/home/ecoop-2020/).
Many of you may have seen this from the conference website itself, and I was waiting until the camera ready copy was produced to properly publicly announce.
This was joint
work with Wim Vanderbauwhede, and Edwin Brady.

> Idris' `Effects` library demonstrates how to embed resource
> dependent algebraic effect handlers into a dependently typed host
> language, providing run-time and compile-time based reasoning on
> type-level resources.  Building upon this work, `RESOURCES` is a
> framework for realising *Embedded Domain Specific Languages* (EDSLs)
> with type systems that contain domain specific substructural
> properties.  Differing from `Effects`, `RESOURCES` allows a
> language's substructural properties to be encoded within type-level
> resources that are associated with language variables.  Such an
> association allows for multiple effect instances to be reasoned
> about autonomically and without explicit type-level declaration.
> Type-level predicates are used as proof that the language's
> substructural properties hold.  Several exemplar EDSLs are presented
> that illustrates our framework's operation and how dependent types
> provide correctness-by-construction guarantees that substructural
> properties of written programs hold.

More details will follow around the time of the conference.
