---
title: "PIM Update"
tags: ["orgmode", "emacs", "pim"]
date: 2024-05-04
---

It have been over a year since I last [wrote about how I 'PIM'](2023-02-23-PIM.html).

Time for an update, especially as I have a proper job now...

So long story short:

> Emacs Lifer; still using OrgMode

So what is different? I have more tags and more files, and more techniques to address productivity.

## Files, Files, and More Files...

I still keep a number of files in my git-controlled `org` folder for many things:

`tasks.org`
: is still my main TODO list that collects mostly dust, but is starting to see new life...
`journal.org`
: is still my diary, organised as a `date+filetree`;
`meetings.org`
: is where I store personal meeting notes, and is too under a `date+filetree`
`notebook.org`
: is where I store random short notes (I have a `notes` folder for longer ones)

New to this list are:

`activities.org`
: a `date+filetree` file where I record promotion-related activities, this gives better context than an up-to-date CV or the information getting lost in my `journal.org`;
`reflections.org`
: a `date+filetree` where I write down reflections over incidents at work to help me process them, and address any confusions on my end;
`setup.org`
: a directory local setup containing the dir local tags used in my `tasks`, `journal`, and `meetings` files (note: orgmode supports the following directive `#+SETUPFILE: <file>`);
`timebox.org`
: a dedicated `date+filetree` organised file for organising my time;

## Tags

The original set of hierarchical tags I developed last year did serve me well.
With my new job, however, my workload is now more varied and requires me to juggle a lot more things in my head.
I know have the following:

My set of `actions` has now be rethought, detailing all that I do...specifically, emails/letters, admin duties, general tasks, meetings, events (such as seminars that I attend or organise), reviews that need doing, and of course student facing time (education) and exam boards.


```
#+TAGS: { actions : email admin task meeting event review edu holiday }
#+TAGS: { event   : meeting seminar lecture examboard }

#+TAGS: { examboard : online physical hybrid }
#+TAGS: { meeting   : online physical hybrid }
#+TAGS: { lecture   : online physical hybrid }
#+TAGS: { seminar   : online physical hybrid }

#+TAGS: { task : activity cwork }

```

Gone is the original  `context`, and it has been replaced by my own personalised workload model.
As a lecturer, I have 'local duties' that are mapped to official models and needs HoD approval to change :-(
This workload model is nonetheless local, and doesn't explicitly account for other 'official' (and expected) parts of my job: community service, CPD.
So I have added those aspects, as my official workload should keep track of it...[^1]

More so I have taken advantage of hierarchical tags to break this workload down further.

```
#+TAGS: { research    : grant phd ra role }
#+TAGS: { grant       : ... }
#+TAGS: { cis         : ... }
#+TAGS: { phd         : ... }
#+TAGS: { ra          : ... }

#+TAGS: { teaching    : modules... }
#+TAGS: { citizenship : ... }
#+TAGS: { service     : ... }
#+TAGS: { cpd         : ... }
```

So within my workload model I keep track of:

research
: research activities which include: grants (project I run, am part of, or am developing); research students (PGRs); future research asses (assistants and associates) I will line manage; and official group roles;

teaching
: teaching duties which include: project students; and modules;

citizenship
: local citizenship such as committee membership, group membership;

service
: external citizenship (i.e. community service) such as external organisations I engage with, memberships, prgramming/review committees;

cpd
: my own training and education

Note that I have anonymised this a little, but the ellipsis don't expand to much...

I will see how this goes, but I think it is an appropriate contextualisation of my increasing roles and activities.
The forest is, however, getting a tad denser that I would like and this *will* fast tag selection for org mode.

## Sequences and TODO States

I have also updated my set of TODO states, with these types and sequences enabling me to capture difference TODO sequences.

We begin with `TODO`:

```
#+SEQ_TODO: TODO(t) |
```

before providing types to categorise paper review actions and comments.

```
#+TYP_TODO: TYPO(e) ACTION(a) CONSIDER(c) |
```

We then have a sequence for tracking bookings.

```
#+SEQ_TODO: WAITING(w) BOOKED(b) |
```

and a sequence for tracking things in motion, or not.

```
#+SEQ_TODO: NOW(n) PAUSED(p) |
```

Finally we have the end states.

```
#+SEQ_TODO: | DONE(d) CANCELED(c)
```

## Timeboxing

The last aspect I want to touch on is that of [`timeboxing`](https://asana.com/resources/what-is-timeboxing).
I am not a religious following of any productivity techniques, I dabble here and there, but timeboxing is something that I have found useful.

Essentially, I use timeboxing to structure my day and record how the day went.
OrgMode is nice in that regard as I can use timestamps and `date-filetree` to do the planning (structuring) and recording (journalling), and view it using the builtin Org (Super) Agenda mode, or [`org-timeblock`](https://github.com/ichernyshovvv/org-timeblock) a lightweight means to view one's agenda as a calendar[^2].

More so, I am starting to incorporate meta-goals in my `timebox.org` to help me further focus on what needs doing.
The TODO items from my job is daunting.

## Coda

Finally, what is the same?
I Still don't GTD as much as I should using OrgMode.
I guess old habits die hard...
See you in another year...


[^1]: to be fair, there are special entries in workload model....
[^2]: I should re-investigate [Calfw](https://github.com/kiwanami/emacs-calfw)
