---
title: "Trusted Timestamps & Provenance of when Students Did their Work "
tags: ["teaching", "musing"]
date: 2025-04-24
---

In this article we will take a quick look at how we can use *Trusted Timestamps* to better establish the provenance of student (coding) assignments.


# The Problem

I often assess the attainment of learning outcomes using 'coding projects'.
The coding projects I design are styled as:

-   **openbook:** Students are free to use any resources to help them complete the project;

-   **takehome:** Students are free to do the project in places that suit them best (the lab or at home);

Unfortunately,
with such styled projects this leaves open the *provenance* of each student submission's development history.
When assessing attainment we,
as instructors,
must be sure that the student themselves did indeed create the coursework.

Factors that we must consider are:

-   Did the student use Generative AI?
-   Did the student plagiarise their work from other sources?

Although we use plagiarism detection tools such as TurnItIn (or Urkind or JPlag), they only do so much and can report false positives.

A related problem is when students claim they submitted the 'wrong submission'.
When presented with the 'original' submission by the student we need to verify that the submission was as presented **prior to the submission deadline**.


# DVCS as a partial solution

During my teaching career I have seen how beneficial distributed version control systems have been in attesting provenance.

Importantly,
we can use DVCSs as a means to capture the development history of a project.
Unfortunately,
such history is **weak** as DVCs enable one to rewrite history as one pleases.
Thus,
on their own DVCS do not offer **strong** submission provenance.


# Coding forges as a partial solution

Since joining Strathclyde I have seen colleagues use coding forges
(GitHub and a local Gitlab instance)
for host student submissions.
Students then submit a URL via the coursework submission tool.

An interesting aspect of using forges is that the development history is hosted by a third-party.
As long as the student pushes to the remote forge the instructors can view the history.
A force push of new history,
unfortunately,
removes that certainty.


# Trusted Infrastructure as a partial solution

Recently,
I have learned how colleagues have used evidence from OneDrive storage as a means to attest provenance.
That is,
we can use the file modification times on OneDrive as a means to assert provenance.
Such provenance is,
however,
**weak** as if the student touches the files then the timestamps are no longer valid.

When I was at St Andrews,
however,
I encountered a way to provide stronger provenance using a specially deployed forge.
At St Andrews,
students had access to a Mercurial service built-in to the user accounts.
Specifically,
each valid user account
(staff **and** student) had a Mercurial remote (`.hg`, IIRC) exposed as:

    username.hg.cs.sta.ac.uk

Students could use their accounts as a means to host their coursework.
Importantly,
user accounts were hosted/managed/controlled using a ZFS solution.
From which snapshots were created for back up purposes.

An important consequence of this setup was that:
**if** a student submitted the 'wrong' submission **and** had they used the Schools provided Mercurial service,
**we** could checkout a version of their coding project before the submission deadline and use the restored submission as the basis for marking.
Given that we operated the infrastructure,
the provenance/trust of the submission could be attested **strongly**.

This setup was not ideal as using gitlab/github offers a better development experience.


# Trusted Attestation

Recently,
I have been reading about the attestation of software supply chains.
Specifically:

-   <https://cli.github.com/manual/gh_attestation>
-   <https://slsa.dev/>

The core idea being that a **trusted third-party** provides attestation of software artefact generation.
One way that attestation is provided is through **trusted timestamps** to timestamp important stages in the software development lifecycle.
A **trusted timestamp** is timestamped data that is digitally signed by a trusted third-party.

In fact,
trusted timestamps are useful for Digital Forensics!

<https://www.metaspike.com/trusted-timestamping-rfc-3161-digital-forensics/>

The process of **trusted timestamps**,
including file formats and protocols,
have been encoded within RFC3161.
There are many Timestamp Authorities one can chose from:

-   <https://freetsa.org/index_en.php>
-   <https://knowledge.digicert.com/general-information/rfc3161-compliant-time-stamp-authority-server>

Not to mention,
that we can use OpenSSL and CURL as client software to interact with TimeStamp Authorities and Timestamps themselves.


# Integration of Trusted Timestamps into the Development Process

We know that DVCSs offer a record of development history but that record cannot be fully trusted.
Integrating trusted timestamps at each commit enables non-repudiation of that history.
`GitTustedTimestamps` is a git postcommit hook that associates each commit with a trusted timestamp.

<https://medium.com/swlh/git-as-cryptographically-tamperproof-file-archive-using-chained-rfc3161-timestamps-ad15836b883>
<https://github.com/MrMabulous/GitTrustedTimestamps/>

Unfortunately,
`GitTrustedTimestamp` is itself a heavy weight solution,
as each rebase version rewrite needs to be re-trusted.

Solutions such as
[SALSA](https://slsa.dev/)
are also heavy weight when looking to integrated trusted timestamps into the development process.
We need to provide quite complex infrastructure that includes CI servers and actions.
(Having the infrastructure to do so within a University would be quite nice though!)
A key take-away from SALSA,
however,
is that trusted timestamps are created at important milestones such as version tagging and artifact generation.

Our approach to asserting the provenance of student submissions will be similar:
enable insertion of trusted timestamps at important milestones.
Specifically,
the most important milestone of all:
submission.


# Intermezzo: Only working on Clean Trees

To help our students we need to ensure that all operations are performed on a clean working tree.
I was fortunate to have found
[a simple solution that integrates into a `Makefile`](https://kgolding.uk/snippets/makefile-check-git-status/),
enabling us to block targets when the tree is dirty.

    .PHONY: status

    status:
            @status=$$(git status --porcelain); \
            if [ ! -z "$${status}" ]; \
            then \
                    echo "Error - working directory is dirty. Commit those changes!"; \
                    exit 1; \
            fi


# A target to timestamp projects.

Our solution will borrow from GitTrustedTimestamp,
and insert commits recording trusted timestamps of the project's current status.
Like GitTrustedTimestamp we will use standard utilities
(`openssl`, `curl`, and friends)
for timestamp generation.

We begin by generating a 'unique' name to label the binary request/response.

    STAMP := $(shell date +%Y-%m-%d-%H-%M-%S)

We will use the
[Free Timestamp Authority](https://freetsa.org/).

    TrustedTimestampAuthority := https://freetsa.org/tsr

We will then start writing our `timestamp` target that only works on clean trees:

    timestamp: status

We will store all our timestamps into a 'hidden' folder called `.timestamp`.

    mkdir -p .timestamp

With the infrastructure written we now generate our timestamp request based on the hash of the current head.

    @commit=$$(git rev-parse --verify HEAD); \
    openssl ts -query \
      -digest="$${commit}" -sha1 -cert \
      -out .timestamp/$(STAMP)-$(REGNO).request.tsq

We requires `-sha1` as the version of git on my machine still uses `sha1`;
`openssl` complains about size mismatches.
The request file
(`.tsq`, with a unique name that also includes the student's registration number)
can now be sent to the Timestamp Authority.
We do so using `curl`:

    curl -H "Content-Type: application/timestamp-query" \
      --data-binary "@.timestamp/${STAMP}-${REGNO}.request.tsq" \
      ${TrustedTimestampAuthority} \
      --output .timestamp/${STAMP}-${REGNO}.response.tsr

Like the request,
we store the response
(`.tsr`; the timestamp itself)
as a binary file in our `.timestamp` directory and give the response a unique name.

Next we need to construct a meaningful commit message,
and store the request and responses in the commit itself.

We so by generating a commit message using the text version of the timestamp,
together with a meaningful brief message.

    echo "[ admin ][ tts ] establishing dev history provenance.\n\n" > .timestamp/$(STAMP)-$(REGNO).response.txt

    openssl ts -reply -in .timestamp/$(STAMP)-$(REGNO).response.tsr -text >> .timestamp/$(STAMP)-$(REGNO).response.txt

We can then commit the request/response and remove the commit message.

    git commit .timestamp/ --quiet -F "./timestamp/$(STAMP)-$(REGNO).response.txt"
    rm .timestamp/$(STAMP)-$(REGNO).response.txt


# Verifying Timestamps

To verify timestamps we need to obtain the verification keys for our Trusted Timestamp Authority.
The keys for FreeTSA are online.

We can point our Makefile to them as follows:

    TrustedTimestampAuthorityCertCA := ~/freetsa/cacert.pem
    TrustedTimestampAuthorityCert   := ~/freetsa/tsa.crt

I have dumped them in my home directory,
where they live does not matter.

We can then use `openssl` to verify any request/response pair in our `.timestamp` directory.

    .PHONY: timestamp-verify ${shell ls .timestamp/*.tsr}

    .timestamp/*.tsr:
            openssl ts -verify \
            -in $@ \
            -queryfile ${subst response,request,${subst tsr,tsq,$@}} \
            -CAfile    ${TrustedTimestampAuthorityCertCA} \
            -untrusted ${TrustedTimestampAuthorityCert}


# What do students submit?

The `timestamp` target inserts trusted timestamps in the development history.
A question now is what are we asking students to submit?

Well,
we can ask students to submit links to their git repositories on their favourite forges.
The trusted timestamps provide **strong** assurances that the development occurred when it did.
If we ask students to **sign** their commits, we can get stronger authenticity claims,
especially if we provided Students with signing keys!

Forges,
however,
may be hosted by third-parties and third-parties can go offline.
It may be better to ask students to create a git-bundle that preserves the development history (including timestamps).

Of course this infrastructure will fail if students do not insert the timestamps themselves!

# Appendix

The raw markdown source for this post has been timestamped!

```
Status info:
Status: Granted.
Status description: unspecified
Failure info: unspecified

TST info:
Version: 1
Policy OID: tsa_policy1
Hash Algorithm: sha256
Message data:
    0000 - 27 64 54 0b d3 dd 6d 30-97 a8 32 76 d4 58 92 be   'dT...m0..2v.X..
    0010 - 8c 16 8e d4 71 d0 c5 93-76 76 f9 5c 57 ce b9 f9   ....q...vv.\W...
Serial number: 0x065FAB92
Time stamp: Apr 24 20:38:59 2025 GMT
Accuracy: unspecified
Ordering: yes
Nonce: 0x7397E2316F9C0815
TSA: DirName:/O=Free TSA/OU=TSA/description=This certificate digitally signs documents and time stamp requests made using the freetsa.org online services/CN=www.freetsa.org/emailAddress=busilezas@gmail.com/L=Wuerzburg/C=DE/ST=Bayern
Extensions:
```
